>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JULY 2: WITH THE
REPEAL OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT STALLED, PRESIDENT TRUMP
CONTINUES HIS BATTLE WITH THE
MEDIA.
DOCUMENTING CLIMATE CHANGE
UNDERWATER-- HOW WARMING OCEANS
ARE AFFECTING CORAL REEFS.
AND, ANTARCTICA IS MELTING...
WHAT THAT COULD MEAN FOR SEA
LEVEL RISE.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE WEEKEND AFTER SENATE
REPUBLICANS DELAYED ANY VOTES ON
THEIR BILL TO REPEAL AND REPLACE
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT, TRUMP ADMINISTRATION
OFFICIALS SAY THEY'RE OPTIMISTIC
A COMPROMISE IS WITHIN REACH.
TODAY, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
SECRETARY TOM PRICE SAID AFTER
THE JULY 4 RECESS, HE BELIEVES
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER MITCH
McCONNELL WILL GET LEGISLATION
THAT COULD LOWER HEALTH
INSURANCE COSTS BACK ON TRACK.
>> WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO IS
BRING ALL OF THOSE PRICES DOWN.
EVERYBODY.
PREMIUMS IN THIS NATION HAVE
DOUBLED OVER THE PAST FOUR
YEARS, UP AN AVERAGE OF $3,000
DOLLARS FOR THE AVERAGE FAMILY.
THAT'S A TAX ON EVERYBODY.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE HURDLE TO
SECURING ENOUGH SENATE VOTES IS
LAST WEEK'S ANALYSIS FROM THE
CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE,
WHICH FORECAST THE BILL COULD
CAUSE 22 MILLION AMERICANS TO
LOSE INSURANCE OVER THE NEXT
DECADE, PARTICULARLY THOSE
COVERED BY OBAMACARE'S EXPANSION
OF MEDICAID FOR LOW-INCOME
AMERICANS.
THE C.B.O. ALSO PROJECTED THE
SENATE BILL COULD MAKE INSURANCE
PREMIUMS GO UP FOR OLDER
AMERICANS NEARING RETIREMENT.
WHITE HOUSE LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR
MARC SHORT TODAY ECHOED A
SUGGESTION BY PRESIDENT TRUMP
AND SOME SENATORS THAT THEY
SHOULD CONSIDER REPEALING
OBAMACARE NOW AND REPLACING IT
LATER.
>> IF THE REPLACEMENT PART IS
TOO DIFFICULT FOR REPUBLICANS TO
COME TOGETHER, THEN LET'S GO
BACK AND HANDLE THE FIRST STEP
AND REPEAL.
SO THAT'S AN OPTION AND THEN AT
THAT POINT IF YOU'VE REPEALED IT
YOU CAN COME BACK WITH A
REPLACEMENT EFFORT THAT COULD BE
MORE BIPARTISAN.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
REPUBLICAN SENATORS PUBLICLY
OPPOSED TO THE BILL IN ITS
CURRENT FORM, MIKE LEE OF UTAH,
SAYS IT DOES TOO LITTLE TO
PROTECT THE MIDDLE CLASS.
>> THIS BILL, THE ONE WE'VE BEEN
DISCUSSING IN THE SENATE, HAS
BAILOUTS FOR INSURANCE
COMPANIES.
IT HAS HUNDREDS OF BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS IN TAX RELIEF FOR THE
AFFLUENT.
IT EVEN HAS SOME PROVISIONS FOR
THE POOR.
WHO IT LEAVES OUT ARE THE
FORGOTTEN MAN AND THE FORGOTTEN
WOMAN-- THOSE EARNING A COMBINED
HOUSEHOLD INCOME OF $75,000 OR
SO WHO HAVE BEEN LEFT BEHIND.
>> Sreenivasan: DEMOCRATIC WEST
VIRGINIA SENATOR JOE MANCHIN
SAID TODAY OBAMACARE NEEDS"
REPAIR" TO FIX THE PRIVATE
INSURANCE MARKET, BUT NOT TO BE
REPEALED.
FORMER REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CONTENDER AND OHIO GOVERNOR JOHN
KASICH SAID THE BILL'S $45-
BILLION TO FIGHT THE OPIOID
EPIDEMIC IS TOO LOW.
PRESIDENT TRUMP DIDN'T COMMENT
ON THE FATE OF THE REPUBLICAN
HEALTHCARE PLAN TODAY, BUT HE
FOUND TIME TO TWEET A BIZARRE
VIDEO SHOWING HIM PUNCHING AND
BODY-SLAMMING A MAN WITH A CNN
LOGO SUPERIMPOSED ON HIS FACE,
THE OFFICIAL POTUS ACCOUNT
RETWEETED IT.
A VERSION OF THE ORIGINAL VIDEO
IS FROM A "WRESTLEMANIA" EVENT
MISTER TRUMP PARTICIPATED IN TEN
YEARS AGO.
A DOCTORED-UP VERSION WAS FIRST
POSTED ON THE SOCIAL MEDIA SITE
REDDIT EARLIER THIS WEEK.
IN RESPONSE, CNN SAID...
IT WENT ON TO SAY...
LAST NIGHT, THE PRESIDENT HAD
REPORTERS ON HIS MIND WHEN HE
TOOK TIME OUT FROM HIS HOLIDAY
WEEKEND AT HIS NEW JERSEY GOLF
CLUB.
AT WASHINGTON'S KENNEDY CENTER,
HE ADDRESSED A RALLY AND CONCERT
FOR VETERANS SPONSORED BY AN
EVANGELICAL CHRISTIAN CHURCH.
>> THE FAKE MEDIA IS TRYING TO
SILENCE US, BUT WE WILL NOT LET
THEM.
(CHEERS)
BECAUSE THE PEOPLE KNOW THE
TRUTH.
THE FAKE MEDIA TRIED TO STOP US
FROM GOING TO THE WHITE HOUSE,
BUT I'M PRESIDENT, AND THEY'RE
NOT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE HEAD OF THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY-
- SCOTT PRUITT-- HAS LAUNCHED A
FORMAL PROCESS TO REVIEW AND
CHALLENGE MAINSTREAM CLIMATE
SCIENCE.
THE CRITIQUE WILL REPORTEDLY BE
MODELED ON HOW THE U.S. MILITARY
IDENTIFIES BATTLEFIELD
VULNERABILITIES.
EMILY HOLDEN FROM "E AND E"
NEWS'S "CLIMATEWIRE" BROKE THE
STORY ON FRIDAY AND JOINS ME NOW
FROM WASHINGTON TO DISCUSS IT.
SO, EXPLAIN, HOW IS THIS PROCESS
GOING TO WORK?
>> SO WHAT WE KNOW SO FAR IS
ESSENTIALLY THAT ADMINISTRATOR
PRUITT WANTS TO RECRUIT
SCIENTISTS TO WORK ON THIS RED
TEAM, BLUE TEAM TO SORT OF LOOK
AT ANY POTENTIAL VULNERABILITY
OR UNCERTAINTY IN CLIMATE CHANGE
REPORTS.
SO THE RED TEAM WOULD DO THAT,
THE BLUE TEAM WOULD BE THE TEAM
PRODUCING AND DEFENDING THE
REPORTS.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS KIND OF
FLIES IN THE FACE OF
PEER-REVIEWED SCIENTIFIC
JOURNALS AND HOW THEY ACTUALLY
PUT SCIENCE FORWARD.
>> IT DOES, AND THAT'S
ABSOLUTELY WHAT YOU'VE HEARD
FROM THE SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY IN
RESPONSE TO THIS, THEY'RE SAYING
THIS IS EXACTLY HOW SCIENCE IS
MADE, SO BEFORE WE PUBLISH
ANYTHING ON CLIMATE CHANGE OR
ANY OTHER MATTER WE'VE HAD IT
REVIEWED BY OTHER SCIENTISTS WHO
HAVE LOOKED TO SEE THAT WE'VE
DONE EVERYTHING CORRECTLY AND
THAT WE'VE COME TO THE CORRECT
CONCLUSIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
FACT THAT THE OVERWHELMING
MAJORITY OF CLIMATE SCIENTISTS
SAY THAT THIS IS REALLY NOT UP
FOR DISPUTE?
SO IF YOU WANTED TO DO THIS RED
TEAM BLUE TEAM, WOULD IT BE RED
TEAM THREE AND BLUE TEAM 97?
>> WE DON'T KNOW A LOT ABOUT
WHAT THE SPECIFICS WOULD LOOK
LIKE, IT'S SMALL GROUP OF PEOPLE
WHO ARE DISSENTERS WHO DO NOT
AGREE WITH THE VAST MAJORITY WHO
OF CLIMATE SCIENTISTS WHO SAY
THAT CLIMATE CHANGES HAPPENING
THAT HUMANS ARE A CAUSE, A MAIN
CAUSE, AND THAT ACTION NEEDS TO
BE TAKEN AS SOON AS POSSIBLE TO
TRY TO STALL CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND HOW DID YOU
FIND OUT THIS INFORMATION ON
FRIDAY?
>> I ACTUALLY WAS AT AN EVENT
WHERE THE PRESIDENT WAS SPEAKING
AT THE ENERGY DEPARTMENT
HEADQUARTERS AND HAD A CHAT WITH
BOB MURRAY, WHO'S THE C.E.O.
OF MURRAY ENERGY, ONE OF THE
BIGGEST COAL COMPANIES IN THE
U.S.
AND HE MENTIONED TO ME THAT HE
HAD HAD A MEETING WITH SCOTT
PRUITT THE SAME MORNING AT A
COAL LOBBY BOARD MEETING AND
THAT HE HAD SPOKEN TO HIM ABOUT
THIS ISSUE AND WHAT HE PLANNED
TO DO AND ALSO WHETHER HE PLANS
TO CHALLENGE A LEGAL FINDING
THAT IS THE BASIS FOR U.S.
GREENHOUSE GAS REGULATIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: PUT THIS IN
PERSPECTIVE ON THE OTHER STEPS
THAT SCOTT PRUITT TAKEN WHEN IT
COMES TO CLIMATE SCIENCE.
>> SO, FOR THE BUDGET PROPOSAL
HE HAS CUT PRETTY MUCH ANYTHING
RELATED TO CLIMATE SCIENCE THAT
HIS AGENCY DOES RIGHT NOW.
IT'S UNCLEAR WHETHER CONGRESS
IS GOING TO APPROVE THE NUMBERS
THAT HE AND THE PRESIDENT ARE
LOOKING AT.
BUT ESSENTIALLY HE'S NIXED
ANYTHING THAT WORK ON CLIMATE
SCIENCE WITHIN THE E.P.A.,
HE'S TAKEN EVERYTHING DOWN FROM
THE WEBSITE THAT HE CAN.
SO THAT PART IS NOT A SURPRISE.
HE'S ALREADY EXPRESSED THAT EVEN
THAT HE DOES NOT BELIEVE THAT
CARBON DIOXIDE IS A MAIN CAUSE
OF CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> Sreenivasan: EMILY HOLDING
FROM "E AND E" NEWS, THANKS FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE THERE
MIGHT BE EFFORTS TO CHALLENGE
CLIMATE SCIENCE IN WASHINGTON,
A NEW DOCUMENTARY CALLED
"CHASING CORAL" REVEALS
THAT THERE IS NO DEBATING THE
CHANGES OCCURRING IN THE WORLD'S
CORAL REEFS.
THE FILM SHOWS THE DESTRUCTION
OF THE WORLD'S CORAL REEFS IN A
WAY THEY'VE NEVER BEEN SEEN
BEFORE.
IT SHOWS THE EFFECTS OF RISING
SEA TEMPERATURES CAUSED BY
CLIMATE CHANGE.
"CHASING CORAL" IS NOW PLAYING
IN SELECT THEATERS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY AND WILL PREMIERE ON
NETFLIX JULY 14TH.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S SASKIA DE
MELKER SPOKE WITH THE FILM'S
DIRECTOR ABOUT THE CHALLENGE OF
SHOWING THE PUBLIC THE RARELY
SEEN, UNDERWATER EFFECTS OF
CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> Reporter: THE DOCUMENTARY"
CHASING CORAL" TELLS THE STORY
OF A THREE-YEAR EFFORT TO
CAPTURE THE LOSS OF THE WORLD'S
CORAL REEFS THROUGH TIME-LAPSE,
UNDERWATER PHOTOGRAPHY.
THE FILM FOCUSES ON THE PROCESS
CALLED CORAL BLEACHING.
WHEN OCEAN WATER BECOMES TOO
WARM, CORALS BECOME STRESSED AND
EXPEL THE ALGAE LIVING IN THEIR
TISSUE, CAUSING THE CORALS TO
TURN COMPLETELY WHITE.
CORAL BLEACHING IS HAPPENING
MORE OFTEN AS CLIMATE CHANGE
RAISES THE TEMPERATURE OF
OCEANS, WHICH HAVE ABSORBED MORE
THAN 90% OF THE HEAT CREATED BY
MAN-MADE GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS.
ONE AREA THE FILM FOCUSES ON IS
AUSTRALIA'S GREAT BARRIER REEF,
WHERE THE AVERAGE OCEAN WATER
TEMPERATURE HAS WARMED BY ABOUT
1.2-DEGREES FAHRENHEIT OVER THE
LAST CENTURY.
JEFF ORLOWSKI DIRECTED "CHASING
CORAL."
>> CORAL REEFS ARE THE BACKBONE
FOR THE ENTIRE OCEAN.
THEY ARE THE NURSERY FOR THE
OCEAN.
ABOUT A QUARTER OF ALL MARINE
LIFE IN THE OCEAN SPENDS PART OF
ITS LIFECYCLE ON A CORAL REEF.
AND THERE ARE ABOUT A BILLION OR
SO PEOPLE THAT DEPEND ON CORAL
REEFS FOR FISH FOR THEIR FOOD,
FOR PROTEIN.
>> Reporter: A TEAM OF DIVERS,
PHOTOGRAPHERS, AND SCIENTISTS
LOGGED 650 HOURS UNDERWATER IN
30 COUNTRIES TO MAKE "CHASING
CORAL."
ORLOWSKI SAYS THE CHALLENGE WAS
GATHERING MULTIPLE IMAGES A DAY
-- IN THE SAME PLACES FOR MONTHS
-- TO SHOW CHANGES TO THE REEF
IN REAL TIME.
>> FROM THE BEGINNING, WE KNEW
THAT IF WE COULD FIGURE OUT A
WAY TO DO TIME LAPSE OF THIS
CHANGE HAPPENING IN THE OCEAN,
THAT IT WOULD BE THE MOST
POWERFUL VISUAL THAT WE COULD
CREATE.
THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT CREATING
EVIDENCE.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT A PIECE OF ICE
CALVING OR YOU LOOK AT A
WILDFIRE BURNING, BECAUSE THAT'S
PART OF THIS NORMAL CYCLE, IT
DOESN'T REGISTER IN THE SAME WAY
AS WHEN YOU CAN DOCUMENT THE
CHANGE OVER TIME
>> Reporter: WHY DID YOU
SPECIFICALLY FOCUS ON THE EVENT
OF CORAL BLEACHING?
>> THE REALLY VALUABLE THING
ABOUT DOCUMENTING CORAL
BLEACHING IS THAT IT IS THIS
STRAIGHT, VERY DIRECT VISUAL
INDICATOR OF HOW HOT THE OCEANS
ARE GETTING.
IF THE TEMPERATURE OF THE WATER
PASSES A CERTAIN THRESHOLD, THE
CORALS TURN WHITE.
IT'S THAT SIMPLE.
THERE'S NOTHING NATURAL ABOUT
THE CYCLE THAT'S GOING ON RIGHT
NOW.
IN 2016, WE LOST 29% OF THE
GREAT BARRIER REEF.
SO 29% OF THE GREAT BARRIER REEF
DIED IN A SINGLE YEAR, BECAUSE
THE WATER WAS HOT.
>> Reporter: THE FILM SHOWS HOW
RICHARD VEVERS, A FORMER
ADVERTISING EXECUTIVE TURNED
OCEAN ACTIVIST, WAS INSPIRED TO
DOCUMENT CORAL BLEACHING, WHICH
CAN BE REVERSED, BUT CAN ALSO
OFTEN LEAD CORALS TO DIE
>> I WAS TRULY SHOCKED BY WHAT I
SAW.
THE REEF WAS WHITE AS FAR AS THE
EYE COULD SEE.
TO BE HONEST, I DIDN'T HAVE THE
KNOWLEDGE TO KNOW HOW TO PROCESS
IT.
WAS THIS DEAD?
WAS IT ALIVE?
THIS IS AIRPORT REEF.
SO THIS IS IN DECEMBER.
AND THIS IS IT NOW.
>> Reporter: IS THERE SOMETHING
ABOUT CORAL BLEACHING THOUGH,
THAT IS A LITTLE BIT
COUNTERINTUITIVE, BECAUSE IT
DOESN'T LOOK LIKE DYING?
>> THERE'S A HUGE CHALLENGE
AROUND CORAL BLEACHING
SPECIFICALLY, BECAUSE WHEN MOST
PEOPLE THINK ABOUT CORAL, THEY
THINK ABOUT THE BEAUTIFUL, WHITE
SCULPTURE SITTING ON THEIR
MANTLE.
AND IT LOOKS SO PRISTINE AND
CLEAN AND BEAUTIFUL.
IT'S NOT SUPPOSED TO LOOK LIKE
THAT WHEN IT'S IN THE OCEAN.
IT HAS COLOR, IT HAS ANIMAL
FLESH LIVING ON IT, IT HAS
PLANTS LIVING INSIDE OF THAT.
THEY LOOK VERY, VERY DIFFERENT
WHEN THEY'RE HEALTHY IN THE
OCEAN THAN THEY DO WHEN THEY'RE
SITTING IN SOMEBODY'S HOME.
>> Reporter: HOW DID YOU
APPROACH TAKING THESE UNDERWATER
IMAGES?
>> WE HAD TO ALIGN THE CAMERAS
MANUALLY EVERY DAY.
YOU GET THE CAMERA POSITIONED IN
THE RIGHT SPOT, PANNING IN THE
RIGHT WAY.
I ACTUALLY HAD UNDERWATER LASERS
ZIP-TIED TO THE CAMERA SYSTEM.
LITERALLY THE GROUND THAT YOU'RE
PUTTING THE CAMERA ON IS
CHANGING EVERY DAY.
SO TO GET THE CAMERA IN THE SAME
EXACT SPOT IN THIS THREE-
DIMENSIONAL SPACE WAS REALLY,
REALLY CHALLENGING.
WE WOULD LET IT ROLL FOR A
COUPLE MINUTES, THEN PICK ALL
THE EQUIPMENT UP, GO TO ANOTHER
SITE AND DO IT AGAIN.
>> Reporter: THIS ISN'T
ORLOWSKI'S FIRST FILM
DOCUMENTING CLIMATE CHANGE.
HIS 2012 FILM "CHASING ICE"
CHRONICLED THE MELTING OF THE
WORLD'S GLACIERS, AND WON AN
EMMY AWARD FOR OUTSTANDING
NATURE PROGRAMMING.
WAS IT MORE DIFFICULT TO CHASE
ICE AND DOCUMENT WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN THE GLACIERS OR TO
CHASE THE CORALS AND DOCUMENT
WHAT'S HAPPENING IN THE OCEANS?
>> WORKING IN THE ARCTIC IS
DEFINITELY COLDER, BUT NOT
NECESSARILY HARDER.
THERE WERE DIFFERENT CHALLENGES.
AND IN MANY WAYS, CHASING CORAL
WAS EVEN MORE OF A STRUGGLE FOR
ME PERSONALLY.
AND MORE OF A STRUGGLE TO
CAPTURE.
GLACIERS RIGHT NOW ARE CHANGING
VERY CONSISTENTLY.
THE INTERESTING THING THAT WE
REALIZED WITH CHASING CORAL WAS
THAT THE CORAL REEFS- THEY CAN
GO FROM LIVING TO DEAD IN TWO
MONTHS.
AND IF YOU'RE NOT THERE AT THE
RIGHT TIME TO CAPTURE THAT
BEFORE AND AFTER, YOU JUST SHOW
UP AND IT'S A DEAD REEF.
SO IT WAS A CHALLENGE TO BE AT
THE RIGHT PLACE AT THE RIGHT
TIME.
>> Reporter: THIS ISN'T A
POLITICAL FILM, BUT IT'S COMING
OUT IN A TIME WHEN CLIMATE
CHANGE IS HIGHLY POLITICIZED.
WHAT'S THAT CHALLENGE IN TERMS
OF MAKING PEOPLE AWARE OF THIS
BUT NOT GETTING SUCKED INTO THAT
DEBATE?
>> I THINK IT IS MASSIVELY
UNFORTUNATE FOR HUMAN
CIVILIZATION THAT THIS ISSUE HAS
BECOME POLITICIZED.
AND WHAT I'M TRYING TO WORK ON
AND WHAT OUR TEAM IS TRYING TO
WORK ON IS HOW DO WE DE-
POLITICIZE IT.
WE NEED TO GET TO A PLACE WHERE
EVERYBODY JUST ACKNOWLEDGES,
OKAY, THERE ARE CHALLENGES, AND
WE KNOW THERE ARE SOLUTIONS, AND
LET'S TALK ABOUT WHAT THOSE
SOLUTIONS ARE.
DENYING THE PROBLEM JUST
PROLONGS THE PROBLEM.
>> Sreenivasan: SCIENTISTS ARE
PREDICTING A 110-MILE SHEET OF
ICE-- A CHUNK THE SIZE OF THE
STATE OF DELAWARE-- WILL BREAK
OFF ANTARCTICA IN THE COMING
DAYS OR WEEKS.
THE CAUSE IS WARMING OCEAN
WATERS, AND THE ICE MELT HAS
IMPLICATIONS FOR SEA LEVEL RISE
WELL BEYOND THE SOUTH POLE
REGION.
THE NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC JULY
ISSUE COVER STORY IS CALLED
"ANTARCTICA IS MELTING, AND
GIANT ICE CRACKS ARE JUST THE
START."
JOINING ME NOW FROM BIRMINGHAM,
ALABAMA, TO DISCUSS THIS IS
ROBERT KUNZIG, THE SENIOR
ENVIRONMENT EDITOR FOR "NATIONAL
GEOGRAPHIC."
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FIRST OF ALL A CHUNK OF ICE THE
SIZE OF DELAWARE SEEMS ALMOST
IMPOSSIBLE TO PUT OUR HEADS
AROUND, BUT THAT'S ACTUALLY A
SMALL PIECE WHEN YOU THINK OF
THE SIZE OF ANTARCTICA.
>> YES, IT IS AND IT'S EVEN JUST
A SMALL PIECE, HARI, OF THE
LARSEN SEA ICE SHELF THAT
IT'S BREAKING OFF OF.
THE LARSEN SEA IS A FLOATING
SLAB OF ICE THE SIZE OF VERMONT
AND NEW HAMPSHIRE COMBINED AND
WHAT'S HAPPENING IS A RIFT THAT
HAS BEEN GROWING YEARS NOW,
THIS YEAR REALLY ACCELERATED.
AS YOU SAID, IT'S ABOUT 15
MILES WIDE, IT... AND IT'S BEEN
GROWING FROM SOUTH TO NORTH.
BASICALLY GOING TO SLICE A BIG
CHUNK OF ICE OFF THE ICE SHELF
AND THAT CHUNK WILL BE THE SIZE
OF DELAWARE.
>> WE HAVE A PICTURE OF ONE OF
THE CRACKS THAT ARE GOING
THROUGH.
SCIENTISTS HAVE BEEN LOOKING
AND STUDYING AND TRYING TO GET
AT SOME OF THESE CRACKS FOR A
LONG TIME.
HOW DEEP DOES IT GO DOWN AND
WHY ARE THEY SO CONCERNED?
>> THE CRACK IN LARSEN SEA,
WHERE LARSEN SEA MEETS THE SEA,
IT'S ABOUT 600 FEET THICK.
AND MOST OF THAT IS UNDER WATER.
SO THERE'S AN ICE CLIFF OF ABOUT
60 FEET THAT TOWERS ABOVE THE
WAVES.
SO THE CRACK GOES ABOUT AT
LEAST 600 FEET.
IF THIS ICEBERG GOES, THE WORRY
IS THAT THE WHOLE ICE SHELF
MIGHT COLLAPSE AS OTHER ICE
SHELVES ON THE ANTARTICA
PENINSULA HAVE ALREADY
COLLAPSED.
ICE SHELVES THERE AND ELSEWHERE
ARE REALLY KIND OF CANARIES IN
THE COAL MINE, THEY'RE A SIGN OF
WHAT'S HAPPENING ALL OVER, THAT
ANTARTICA IS MELTING FASTER THAN
SCIENTISTS HAD EXPECTED.
>> THIS ISN'T JUST ABOUT THE
FACT THAT THE ICE IS ALREADY IN
THE WATER AND IT'S JUST MELTING
IN A GLASS OF WATER, WE'RE
ACTUALLY ADDING NEW ICE CUBES TO
THAT GLASS, WHICH IS WHAT MAKES
THE SEA LEVEL RISE?
>> WELL, YES.
THAT'S THE PERFECT ANALOGY.
THIS ICE, THE LARSON SEA ICE
SHELF IS FLOATING, IT IS LIKE AN
ICE CUBE IN A GLASS OF WATER.
EVEN IF ALL OF IT COLLAPSES,
THAT, ITSELF, DOES NOT ADD TO
SEA LEVEL.
BUT THE THING ABOUT ICE SHELVES
IS THAT THEY FUNCTION LIKE
CORKS, THEY'RE BOTTLING UP A
MUCH LARGER AMOUNT ICE THAT'S ON
THE GROUND, ON THE LAND, IN THIS
CASE, BEHIND THEM.
AND WHEN... THAT'S THE GLACIERS
THAT ARE CARRYING ICE FROM THE
INTERIOR OF ANTARTICA TOWARDS
THE SEA.
THE ICE SHELVES ARE SORT OF THE
FLOATING ENDS OF THE GLACIERS.
AND SO WHEN THAT FLOW INCREASES,
MORE ICE IS FALLING INTO THE SEA
AND RAISING SEA LEVEL.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE ARTICLE
IT TALKS ABOUT HOW SCIENTISTS
MEASURE WHAT'S HAPPENING UNDER
WATER.
WHAT'S HAPPENING UNDERNEATH
THESE ICE SHEETS?
HOW IS THERE WARMER WATER AND
WHAT'S THE INTERACTION OF SALT
WATER DO TO THIS ALL?
>> THE BIG THING IN RECENT YEARS
IS THAT WARMER OCEAN WATER, AND
WHEN I SAY WARM, WARMER, I DON'T
MEAN REALLY WARM.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT FOUR, FIVE
DEGREES ABOVE FREEZING.
THAT WATER IS PENETRATING
FURTHER UP TOWARDS THE COAST OF
ANTARTICA UNDER THE ICE SHELVES
AND IT IS UNDERMINING THE ICE
SHELVES, IT'S MELTING THEM AND
THINNING THEM FROM BELOW AND
WEAKENING THEM.
>> YOU HAVE A LARGE MAP THAT
YOU HAVE IN THE NATIONAL
GEOGRAPHIC ARTICLE THAT PUTS
THIS IN PERSPECTIVE AND THERE'S
AREAS OF KIND OF PURPLE THAT ARE
THE AREAS THAT ARE KIND OF
FLOATING OFF.
THERE'S A COUPLE OF PATCHES OF
RED. WHERE IT'S REALLY
HAPPENING AT AN INCREDIBLE RATE.
TELL US ABOUT HOW FAST IT'S
HAPPENING IN, SAY, THE PINE
GLACIER.
>> IT'S BEEN AN ACCELERATION
SEVERAL TIMES, ALL OVER
ANTARTICA, THE LOSS OF ICE FROM
THE FLOATING ICE SHELVES HAS
INCREASED BY A FACTOR OF 12 IN
THE PAST TWO DECADES.
SO WHERE IN THE MID '90s THEY
WERE LOSING SIX BILLION TONS OF
ICE, NOW THEY'RE LOSING 74.
IT'S NATURAL FOR THESE GLACIERS
TO FLOAT IN THE SEA.
BUT WHAT'S HAPPENING IS THE
SPEED HAS INCREASED.
>> Sreenivasan: ROBERT KUNZIG,
THE SENIOR ENVIRONMENT EDITOR
FOR "NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC,"
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE,
SADLY, AN ESTIMATED 39,000
HOMELESS MILITARY VETERANS IN
THE UNITED STATES, ACCORDING TO
THE FEDERAL DEPARTMENT OF
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT.
ON THIS INDEPENDENCE DAY
WEEKEND, WE HAVE A STORY ABOUT A
NATIONWIDE EFFORT TO LOCATE,
IDENTIFY, AND BURY THE REMAINS
OF HOMELESS AND OFTEN FORGOTTEN
VETERANS.
MITCHELL RILEY FROM ARIZONA
PUBLIC MEDIA REPORTS ON THIS
ONGOING EFFORT IN THE TUCSON
AREA.
>> GOT A BIKE COMING THROUGH.
>> Reporter: ON A BRIGHT
SATURDAY MORNING, ORGANIZERS
FROM THE SOUTHERN ARIZONA
MISSING IN AMERICA PROJECT,
ALONG WITH MILITARY PERSONNEL,
VETERANS GROUPS, LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICERS, AND PRIVATE CITIZENS,
GATHER AT THE ADAIR FUNERAL HOME
IN NORTHWEST TUCSON.
PIMA COUNTY DETECTIVE SHAUN
PFUND IS THE LAW ENFORCEMENT
LIAISON.
>> THIS IS ABOUT YOU.
THE MISSING IN AMERICA PROJECT
WAS A CREATION OF A VET WHO
BELIEVED THAT NO VETERAN SHOULD
GO WITHOUT HONORABLE BURIAL, AND
OUR INTENT IS ALWAYS TO LOCATE,
IDENTIFY, AND RECOVER VETERANS.
>> Reporter: OVER THE PAST SIX
YEARS, 255 VETERANS HAVE BEEN
LAID TO REST THROUGH THIS EFFORT
IN SOUTHERN ARIZONA.
STATEWIDE, THE NUMBER IS MORE
THAN 430.
NATIONWIDE, MORE THAN 3,100 VETS
HAVE BEEN IDENTIFIED AND
INTERRED WITH MILITARY HONORS.
>> IT'S A VERY EMOTIONAL THING,
BECAUSE I ACKNOWLEDGE THE PERSON
WHO HAS SACRIFICED SO MUCH FOR
ME.
>> AS WE RIDE TODAY, PLEASE HAVE
YOUR ANGELS SPREAD THEIR WINGS
OF PROTECTION AND KEEP US ALL
SAFE.
>> Reporter: THE CREMATED
REMAINS OF THESE 29 HOMELESS OR
IMPOVERISHED VETERANS ARE
DRIVEN BY MOTORCADE 25 MILES TO
BE INTERRED AT A VETERANS'
CEMETERY IN MARANA, ARIZONA.
THE MISSING IN AMERICA PROJECT
FINDS REMAINS BY WORKING WITH
MORTUARIES, FUNERAL HOMES,
VETERANS GROUPS, AND STATE
AGENCIES.
AFTER DETERMINING THE REMAINS
ARE OF A VETERAN WITH AN
HONORABLE DISCHARGE, THE PROJECT
CARES FOR THEM IN THIS WAY.
>> I HAVE COME ONCE AGAIN TO
HONOR AND ACKNOWLEDGE THE MEN
AND WOMEN WHO HAVE HONORABLY
SERVED OUR NATION IN A TIME OF
WAR AND IN A TIME OF PEACE.
>> Reporter: SOME RECOVERED
VETERANS SERVED AS FAR BACK AS
WORLD WAR II.
OTHERS AS RECENTLY AS IRAQ AND
AFGHANISTAN.
PIMA COUNTY COVERS THE COST OF
CREMATIONS.
THE ADAIR FUNERAL HOME DONATES
THE ENGRAVED URNS.
(GUNFIRE)
>> LUCKETT, JAMES H, U.S. ARMY,
VIETNAM.
(BELL TOLLS)
CARTER, JOHN R., U.S. ARMY, COLD
WAR.
(BELL)
>> FOR THEY FELL NOT UPON THE
BATTLEFIELDS OF THIS WORLD BUT
WITHIN OUR NEIGHBORHOODS AND
CITY STREETS.
UNIDENTIFIED, MARGINALIZED AND
FORGOTTEN, DESTINED TO FADE AWAY
WITHOUT A WORD, A TRIBUTE OR
RECOGNITION OF THEIR RESPECTIVE
SERVICE TO OUR NATION.
I SAY TO EVERYONE HERE WITHIN
THE SOUND OF MY VOICE AND
BEYOND, YOU ARE NOT FORGOTTEN.
>> Reporter: THE NEXT CEREMONY
FOR THE SOUTHERN ARIZONA MISSING
IN AMERICA PROJECT IS SCHEDULED
FOR OCTOBER.
ORGANIZERS HAVE ALREADY
CONFIRMED THE REMAINS OF 12 MORE
VETERANS TO BE HONORED.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW, TO
VIEWERS LIKE YOU.
YOUR CHANCE TO COMMENT ON
STORIES YOU'VE SEEN ONLINE AND
ON OUR BROADCAST.
TWO WEEKS AGO, WE BROUGHT YOU A
STORY FROM ALABAMA, WHERE SOME
RESIDENTS ARE FACING CHALLENGES
FINDING AND PAYING FOR HEALTH
INSURANCE.
ALABAMA IS ONE OF THE FIVE
STATES IN THE COUNTRY THAT ONLY
HAVE ONE INSURANCE PROVIDER
REMAINING UNDER THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT.
WORKING MOM ADDED IT UP:
>> Sreenivasan: NANCY POINTED
OUT ANOTHER CONCERN.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THERE WAS
THIS FROM RAJNI MEHTA.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, CHRIS
JOHNSON OFFERED THIS SUGGESTION.
>> Sreenivasan: AS ALWAYS WE
WELCOME YOUR COMMENTS.
YOU CAN CONNECT WITH US AT
pbs.org/newshour, ON OUR
FACEBOOK PAGE, OR ON TWITTER
@NEWSHOUR.
SEE HOW STATES ARE RESPONDING TO
REQUESTS FOR VOTER DATA FROM
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S COMMISSION.
VISIT PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: TOMORROW IN
TEHRAN, FRANCE AND IRAN SIGN
IRAN'S BIGGEST ENERGY DEAL SINCE
LAST YEAR'S LIFTING OF SANCTIONS
OVER IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
FRENCH OIL GIANT "TOTAL" IS
INVESTING FIVE-BILLION-DOLLARS
OVER 20 YEARS TO DEVELOP A
NATURAL GAS FIELD IN THE PERSIAN
GULF IN PARTNERSHIP WITH CHINA'S
NATIONAL PETROLEUM CORPORATION
AND IRAN.
AND FINALLY, THE UNITED STATES
HAS LIFTED ITS BAN ON LAPTOPS IN
PASSENGER CABINS ON ETIHAD
AIRWAYS FLIGHTS FROM ABU DHABI
TO THE U.S., SAYING THE AIRLINE
HAS MET TIGHTER SECURITY
REQUIREMENTS.
THE LAPTOP BAN REMAINS IN EFFECT
FOR EIGHT OTHER AIRLINES
OPERATING IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND
AFRICA.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.